docs(api): add `useRuntimeConfig` page (#7406)
nuxt/framework: docs/content/3.api/1.composables/use-runtime-config.md

# `useRuntimeConfig`

`useRuntimeConfig` composable is used to expose config variables within the Nuxt application on both server-side and client-side.

## Usage

```ts [server/api/foo.ts]
export default defineEventHandler((event) => {
  const config = useRuntimeConfig()
})
```

> `useRuntimeConfig` provides an `app` object with `baseURL` and `cdnURL` out of the box. However, Nuxt provides the ability to update their values at runtime by setting environment variables in the `.env` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`useRuntimeConfig` provides an `app` object with `baseURL` and `cdnURL` out of the box. However, Nuxt provides the ability to update their values at runtime by setting environment variables.

::alert{type=warning}
Note that Nuxt does not read your `.env` file at runtime. You need to manually set environment variables in a manner suitable for your environment. For example, on a Linux node machine you could run `source .env && node .output/server/index.mjs`.
::
```

## Examples

### Update base URL

By default, the `baseURL` is set to `'/'`.

> However, the `baseURL` can be updated at runtime by setting the `NUXT_APP_BASE_URL` as an environment variable in the `.env` file of your Nuxt App.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, the `baseURL` can be updated at runtime by setting the `NUXT_APP_BASE_URL` as an environment variable.
```

This is particularly useful when there are multiple environments, such as `development`, `test` and `production`, and they share similar variable names with slightly different values.

``` [.env]
NUXT_APP_BASE_URL = 'https://localhost:5555'

> ```

Reviewer: would you update this to be a package.json with a start script?

Then, you can access this new base URL using `config.app.baseURL`.

```ts [/plugins/my-plugin.ts]
export default defineNuxtPlugin((NuxtApp) => {
  const config = useRuntimeConfig()

  // Access baseURL universally
  const baseURL = config.app.baseURL
})
```

### Set CDN URL

This example shows how to set a custom CDN url and access them using `useRuntimeConfig()`.

By default, the `public/` folder is treated as a static content provider. But you can change that by providing your own CDN url through the environment variable.

> First, you set the environment variable `NUXT_APP_CDN_URL` in the `.env` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, you set the environment variable `NUXT_APP_CDN_URL`.
```

``` [.env]

> NUXT_APP_CDN_URL = 'https://cdn.localhost:5555'

Reviewer: likewise, can we update this to a package.json file with a start script?

Reviewer 2: In docs, we shall use _environment_ variable names. Package scripts are `.env` are a way to load envs but both are outside of `.output` still.

```

And then access the new CDN url using `config.app.cdnURL`.

```ts [server/api/foo.ts]
export default defineEventHandler((event) => {
  const config = useRuntimeConfig()
  
  // Access cdnURL universally
  const cdnURL = config.app.cdnURL
})
```

### Private and public variables

This example below shows how to set base API endpoint url for public access and secret API token for only accessible on the server-side.

> - First, you set the environment variable `API_BASE_URL` in the `.env` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- First, you set the environment variable `NUXT_PUBLIC_API_BASE` in the `.env` file.
```

``` [.env]

> API_BASE_URL = 'https://api.localhost:5555'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NUXT_PUBLIC_API_BASE = 'https://api.localhost:5555'
```

```

> - Then access `API_BASE_URL` within the `nuxt.config` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Then access `NUXT_PUBLIC_API_BASE` within the `nuxt.config` file.
```

> Any environment variables set within `.env` file are accessed using `process.env` in the Nuxt app.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any environment variables set within `.env` file are accessed using `process.env` in your `nuxt.config` file. You should not use `process.env` anywhere else in your app, but instead access them from `useRuntimeConfig()`.
```

> Variables needed to be set during runtime are defined in `runtimeConfig.public: {}`, while the variables needed during build-time are added directly inside `runtimeConfig: {}`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Variables needed to be accessed on the client are defined in `runtimeConfig.public`, while variables that should only be available on the server are added directly inside `runtimeConfig`.
```

```ts [/nuxt.config.ts]

> export default defineNuxtConfig({
>     runtimeConfig: {
>         // The private keys are only available on server-side
>         apiSecret: '123',
> 
>         // The public keys are exposed to the client-side
>         public: {
>             apiBase: process.env.API_BASE_URL
>         }
>     }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
export default defineNuxtConfig({
  runtimeConfig: {
    // Private keys are only available on the server
    apiSecret: '123',

    // Public keys are exposed to the client
    public: {
      apiBase: process.env.NUXT_PUBLIC_API_BASE || ''
    }
  }
```

})
```

- And finally access both public and private variables on server-side as below.

```ts [server/api/test.ts]
export default async () => {
  const config = useRuntimeConfig()
  
  // Access public variables
  const result = await $fetch(`${config.public.apiBase}/test`, {
    headers: {
      // Access private variable
      Authorization: `Bearer ${config.apiSecret}`
    }
  })
  return result
}
```

> In this example, since `apiBase` is defined within `public:{}` key, it is universally accessible on both server and client-side, while an `apiSecret` is only accessible on the server-side.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, since `apiBase` is defined within `public`, it is universally accessible on both server and client-side, while `apiSecret` is only accessible on the server-side.
```

::

::ReadMore{link="/guide/features/runtime-config"}
::

## Acess Runtime Config

To access runtime config, we can use `useRuntimeConfig()` composable:

```ts [server/api/test.ts]
export default async () => {
  const config = useRuntimeConfig()

  // Access public variables
  const result = await $fetch(`/test`, {
    baseURL: config.public.apiBase,
    headers: {
      // Access a private variable (only available on the server)
      Authorization: `Bearer ${config.apiSecret}`
    }
  })
  return result
}
```

In this example, since `apiBase` is defined within the `public` namespace, it is universally accessible on both server and client-side, while `apiSecret` **is only accessible on the server-side**.

## Environment Variables

It is possible to update runtime config values using a matching environment variable name prefixed with `NUXT_`.

::ReadMore{link="/guide/features/runtime-config"}
::

### Using the `.env` File

We can set the environment variables inside the `.env` file to make them accessible during **development** and **build/generate**.

``` [.env]
NUXT_PUBLIC_API_BASE_URL = "https://api.localhost:5555"

> NUXT_APR_SECRET = "123"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
NUXT_APP_SECRET = "123"
```

# `useRuntimeConfig`

> `useRuntimeConfig` composable is used to expose config variables within the Nuxt application on both server-side and client-side.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `useRuntimeConfig` composable is used to expose config variables within your app.
```

## Usage

```vue [app.vue]
<script setup lang="ts">
const config = useRuntimeConfig()
</script>
```

```ts [server/api/foo.ts]
export default defineEventHandler((event) => {
  const config = useRuntimeConfig()
})
```

## Define Runtime Config

> The example below shows how to set base API base URL for public access and secret API token for only accessible on the server-side.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The example below shows how to set a public API base URL and a secret API token that is only accessible on the server.
```

We should always define `runtimeConfig` variables inside `nuxt.config`.

```ts [nuxt.config.ts]
export default defineNuxtConfig({
  runtimeConfig: {

>     // The private keys are only available on server-side

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // Private keys are only available on the server
```

    apiSecret: '123',

>     // The public keys are exposed to the client-side

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // Public keys that are exposed to the client
```

    public: {

>       apiBase: process.env.API_BASE_URL || '/api'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      apiBase: process.env.NUXT_PUBLIC_API_BASE || '/api'
```

    }
  }
})
```

::alert

> Variables needed to be accessable from server-side are added directly inside `runtimeConfig: {}`.
> Variables needed to be accessable from both client-side and server-side are defined in `runtimeConfig.public: {}.`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Variables that need to be accessible on the server are added directly inside `runtimeConfig`. Variables that need to be accessible on both the client and the server are defined in `runtimeConfig.public`.
```

::

::ReadMore{link="/guide/features/runtime-config"}
::

## Acess Runtime Config

To access runtime config, we can use `useRuntimeConfig()` composable:

```ts [server/api/test.ts]
export default async () => {
  const config = useRuntimeConfig()

  // Access public variables
  const result = await $fetch(`/test`, {
    baseURL: config.public.apiBase,
    headers: {

>       // Access private variable (only available on server-side)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      // Access a private variable (only available on the server)
```

      Authorization: `Bearer ${config.apiSecret}`
    }
  })
  return result
}
```

> In this example, since `apiBase` is defined within the `public` namespace, it is universally accessible on both server and client-side, while an `apiSecret` **is only accessible on the server-side**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, since `apiBase` is defined within the `public` namespace, it is universally accessible on both server and client-side, while `apiSecret` **is only accessible on the server-side**.
```

## Environment Variables

> It is possible to update runtime config values using matching environment variable name prefixed with `NUXT_`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is possible to update runtime config values using a matching environment variable name prefixed with `NUXT_`.
```

::ReadMore{link="/guide/features/runtime-config"}
::

### Using the `.env` File

> We can set the environment variables inside the `.env` file to make them accessable during **development** and **build/generate**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can set the environment variables inside the `.env` file to make them accessible during **development** and **build/generate**.
```

``` [.env]
NUXT_PUBLIC_API_BASE_URL = "https://api.localhost:5555"
NUXT_APR_SECRET = "123"
```

::alert{type=info}
Any environment variables set within `.env` file are accessed using `process.env` in the Nuxt app during **development** and **build/generate**.
::

::alert{type=warning}
In **production runtime**, you should use platform environment variables and `.env` is not used.
::

::alert{type=warning}
When using git, make sure to add `.env` to the `.gitignore` file to avoid leaking secrets to the git history.
::

## `app` namespace

Nuxt uses `app` namespace in runtime-config with keys including `baseURL` and `cdnURL`. You can customize their values at runtime by setting environment variables.

::alert{type=info}

> This is a reserved namespace. You cannot not introduce additional keys inside `app`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is a reserved namespace. You should not introduce additional keys inside `app`.
```
